We have been working on an update to the LMFDB's classical modular forms
database since a workshop in August, and are now ready for feedback from the
community.  Please feel free to reply to this e-mail with suggestions, or
to comment on the pull request <https://github.com/LMFDB/lmfdb/pull/2717>.
Below is a summary of the changes; you can also see a live version at
http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/.  We invite everyone
to take a look.


*Extent and size*


*Boxes*

Rather than choosing *N* and *k* in boxes, we organize by *Nk²*, which is
asymptotically proportional to the analytic conductor
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/knowledge/show/mf.elliptic.analytic_conductor> of
the newform (a good measure of its complexity).  Our tabulation is complete
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/Completeness> within
the following ranges

 - *Nk²* ≤ 4000

 - *Nk²* ≤ 40000, *χ*=1

 - *Nk²* ≤ 40000, *N* ≤ 24

 - *Nk²* ≤ 14400, *N* ≤ 100, *k* ≤ 12

 - *Nk²* ≤ 100000, *N* ≤ 10

 - *Nk²* ≤ 40000, *k* > 1, dimension ≤ 50

These boxes were chosen to include everything currently in the LMFDB and
other existing tables of modular forms.


*Counts*

 - 338,551 newspaces *S*_*k*(*N*, *χ*) (50,098 nonzero)

 - 281,219 Galois orbits of newforms (48,688 with rational coefficients,
19,306 of weight 1)

 - 14,398,359 complex embedded newforms

 - 14,396,948 degree 2 L-functions

 - 195,163 L-functions for Galois orbits

We have not (yet) computed L-functions for the 1411 complex embedded
newforms that lie in the 80 Galois orbits of newforms of weight k > 200.
This explains the discrepancy embedded newforms and L-function counts.


*Database size*

 - 325 GiB of embedded modular forms (*q*-expansions in C)

 - 123 GiB of trace data (traces of *q*-expansions down to Q)

 - 2 GiB of exact *q*-expansion data (when dim <= 20)


*Computation time*

We spent 50-100 CPU years this fall and winter computing the above data
using a combination of Magma, Pari/GP, and rigorous high precision complex
analytic data computed by Johnathan Bober.  See the completeness knowl
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/Source> for details.


*Code changes*

We made numerous changes and improvements to the LMFDB codebase as we added
the data, both to the classical modular form code and the overall
infrastructure.  The PR totals 362 changed files with 21,560 additions and
16,267 deletions.


*Representation*

Exact coefficients are stored using either a sparse cyclotomic
representation
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/1620/1/bp/a/> or in
terms of an LLL-reduced basis for the coefficient ring
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/6877/2/a/s/>.  We have
exact coefficients in weight 1 or if the dimension is at most 20,
represented using an LLL-optimized basis for the coefficient ring
(this makes the q-expansions more compact and readable than they when
represented using a power basis).

We compute complex *q*-expansions for all embeddings into the complex
numbers, even when the dimension is large
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/983/2/c/a/>.


*Reliability*
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/Reliability>

Many computations were duplicated in Magma and Pari, providing a check for
their correctness.  We also compared with complex analytic data
independently computed by Jon Bober, with William Stein's modular form
tables and Alan Lauder and Kevin Buzzard's weight 1 tables.  Finally, we
have written a verification module for the LMFDB and run various tests on
the data.


We have rigorously verified self twists and projective image types in all
cases, and inner twists and analytic ranks in most cases.  Any values that
are not rigorously computed are explicitly identified.


*User interface*

We have rewritten the front end through which a visitor to the LMFDB
interacts with the data.


*Searches*

 - You can obtain a list of newforms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?search_type=List> or
of newspaces
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?search_type=Spaces>
satisfying various constraints (e.g. rational forms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?dim=1&search_type=List>
).

 - You can view dimensions of newforms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?search_type=Dimensions>
or of newspaces
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?search_type=SpaceDimensions>
in a table organized by *N* and *k*.  You can add constraints
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?char_order=2&search_type=Dimensions>
and change the ranges of N and k
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?level=90-150&weight=1-10&search_type=Dimensions>
 displayed.

- You can browse newforms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?weight=2-&search_type=Traces>
 and newspaces
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?weight=2-&dim=1-&search_type=SpaceTraces>
using a searchable table of traces for their q-expansions, that can be used both
integer and mod-p modes.  An application: if you know a curve is modular,
you can pin down an associated newform by looking at the trace table at
small primes.  Counting points mod p is easy, but computing Euler factors
is hard in high genus.

 - You can get a random form satisfying specificed constraints (e.g. CM
 with level a power of 2
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?level_primes=2&cm=yes&search_type=Random>
).

 - Search results
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?dim=1-&num_forms=10-&char_order=1&search_type=Spaces>
for spaces include decomposition into newforms and into Atkin-Lehner
eigenspaces.


*Browse*

The front page <http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/> includes
a curated lists of interesting newforms and newspaces with hovertext
describing why these forms and spaces were chosen


*Statistics*

We've added statistics
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/stats>, as well as a
new dynamic statistics feature allowing you to view custom statistics (e.g.
statistics on weight and level for forms with CM
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/dynamic_stats?cm=yes&col1=level&buckets1=1%2C2-10%2C11-100%2C101-1000%2C1001-2000%2C2001-4000%2C4001-6000%2C6001-8000%2C8001-10000&totals1=yes&proportions=recurse&col2=weight&buckets2=1%2C2%2C3%2C4%2C5-8%2C9-16%2C17-32%2C33-64%2C65-316&totals2=yes&search_type=DynStats>
)


*Downloads*

Downloads are now more broadly available, and you can download various
things from homepages (trace forms, *q*-expansions, all stored data) and
from search results.


We give linear operators on *S*_*k*(*N*, *χ*), expressed as polynomial
expressions of Hecke operators, so that the newform is the intersection of
their kernels.  This can sometimes speed up construction of the newform in
Magma.


*Form homepages*

 - *q*-expansions are more readable due to changes in representation.
Defaults to showing 10 coefficients, expandable to 100 coefficients on the
page, 1000+ coefficients available for download.

 - trace expansions are also shown, even when the dimension is large
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/983/2/c/a/>

 - include projective image type for weight 1 forms, including A_4
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/124/1/i/a/>, S_4
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/148/1/f/a/>, A_5
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/1763/1/p/b/>, D_2
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/3600/1/e/a/> and large
dihedral <http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/3997/1/cz/a/>.
You can also search for forms with a specified type.

 - Matched weight 1 forms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/385/1/q/b/> with Artin
representations
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ArtinRepresentation/2.5_7_11.6t5.1c1> when
present in the LMFDB

 - include Sato-Tate groups for all newforms of weight larger than 1

 - include provable analytic ranks (e.g. rational form of weight 42
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/2/42/a/a/> and form of
weight 14 with analytic rank 1
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/8/14/b/a/>)

 - include CM/RM fields for newforms with self twists
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/39/1/d/a/>

 - include inner twists
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/1089/1/r/a/> for
twists by characters that yield other forms in the same Galois orbit

 - for forms with exact *q*-expansions, we provide the values of the
character <http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/630/2/bv/c/> in
the same representation

 - We have portraits for both newforms and newspaces, giving plots of the
trace form on the Poincare disc.

 - change in label scheme but we support old labels
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/10/8/1/a>


*Embedded form homepages*

 - There are now homepages
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/983/2/c/a/472/35/> for
newforms equipped with an embedding of the coefficient field into the
complex numbers.  They are linked to from the tables of embeddings on each
newform page.

 - q-expansions are shown with complex coefficients, we include links to
the dual form (complex conjugate).

 - Coefficients (in both arithmetic and analytic normalizations) and Satake
angles are viewable up through n=1000, with more sometimes available for
download in high level.


*Space homepages*

 - We give decompositions of *S*_*k*^new(*N*, χ) into newforms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/9075/2/a/>, of *S*_*k*
^new(Γ₁(*N*)) into newspaces
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/9075/2/> and *S*_*k*
^old(*N*, *χ*) and *S*_*k*^old(Γ₁(*N*)) into lower level pieces.

 - Give dimensions for new and old, Eisenstein and cuspidal subspaces

 - Show the trace form

 - Give bounds on how many a_n are needed to distinguish newforms within a
space.  In addition to the standard Sturm bound, we also provide a computed
trace bound based on the forms that actually occur.


*L-functions*

 - For each complex embedding of a newform with weight at most 200, we have
added an L-function.

 - both arithmetic and analytic normalizations are available

 - analytic ranks

 - Euler factors
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/L/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/5/27/c/a/> at primes
up to 100

 - zeros on critical line have more precision and are stored in the
database rather than computed on the fly, making it easier to find
connections to other objects in the LMFDB

 - change in label scheme but we support old labels


*Experimental features*


We have used classical modular forms as a testing ground for some new
features which are applicable to other areas of the LMFDB.


* There is now a verification module to add consistency checks for data in
Postgres; you can access it by from lmfdb.verify import db and then running
either db.verify or db.tablename.verify.  See the Postgres_FAQ for more
details.

* Dynamic statistics
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/dynamic_stats?cm=yes&col1=level&buckets1=1%2C2-10%2C11-100%2C101-1000%2C1001-2000%2C2001-4000%2C4001-6000%2C6001-8000%2C8001-10000&totals1=yes&proportions=recurse&col2=weight&buckets2=1%2C2%2C3%2C4%2C5-8%2C9-16%2C17-32%2C33-64%2C65-316&totals2=yes&search_type=DynStats>
described
above.

* A variant on knowls used when displaying very long mathematical content.
You can see the results in the *q*-expansions, basis descriptions,
coefficient fields and Hecke kernels for some high weight newforms
<http://cmfs.lmfdb.xyz/ModularForm/GL2/Q/holomorphic/2/218/a/b/> and in
various other places on classical modular form pages.

* Some nice features for 2-d tables
<http://modularform/GL2/Q/holomorphic/?level=1-150&search_type=Dimensions>:
sticky headers and rotated labels.  They're currently implemented in a
somewhat ad-hoc manner, but can be abstracted if more widely used.

* You can change the sort order on search results

* The ability to get a random object satisfying search constraints

* Multiple search result views (e.g. trace tables, dimension tables)

* There is more modularity in the templates, allowing the same search
interface to be used on multiple pages


*MongoDB to Postgres*

While working on classical modular forms, we've fixed various issues with
the transition from MongoDB to Postgres, and eliminated the last dependencies
on MongoDB.  One interface change to be aware of is that one now uses "from
lmfdb import db" to access the database object, rather than "from
lmfdb.db_backend import db".
